Desktop Guide - WPF Initial Release (#13780)
dotnet/docs: docs/desktop-wpf/data/data-binding-overview.md

The data binding functionality in WPF has several advantages over traditional models, including a broad range of properties that inherently support data binding, flexible UI representation of data, and clean separation of business logic from UI.

This article first discusses concepts fundamental to WPF data binding and then goes into the usage of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> class and other features of data binding.

[!INCLUDE [desktop guide under construction](../../../includes/desktop-guide-preview-note.md)]

> ## What is data binding

Author: Is this OK? Markdown lint complains about headings with punctuation

A typical use of data binding is to place server or local configuration data into forms or other UI controls. In WPF, this concept is expanded to include the binding of a broad range of properties to a variety of data sources. In WPF, dependency properties of elements can be bound to CLR objects (including ADO.NET objects or objects associated with Web Services and Web properties) and XML data.

For an example of data binding, take a look at the following application UI from the [Data Binding Demo][data-binding-demo]:

![Data binding sample screenshot](./media/data-binding-overview/demo.png "DataBinding_DataBindingDemo")

The above is the UI of an application that displays a list of auction items. The application demonstrates the following features of data binding:

> - The content of the ListBox is bound to a collection of *AuctionItem* objects. An *AuctionItem* object has properties such as *Description*, *StartPrice*, *StartDate*, *Category*, *SpecialFeatures*, etc.

Author: @mairaw @rpetrusha 

I agree. I've done a lot of clean up while porting this article but there is more to do. One problem I'm having is that there are so many xref links that it makes it look ugly when you read through it in published mode. Further down it gets messier. One paragraph (especially [the validation section below](https://github.com/dotnet/docs/pull/13780/files#diff-95682880d8470fb87de4ba5e56194f26R413) can easily have 10 xref links.

> - The content of the ListBox is bound to a collection of *AuctionItem* objects. An *AuctionItem* object has properties such as *Description*, *StartPrice*, *StartDate*, *Category*, *SpecialFeatures*, etc.

Reviewer: Links behaved differently in MSDN so people used "xref" links more freely back then. It's ok not to link to the API every single time. But if you're not linking, the name should be fenced to prevent localization.

- Although not specified in the figure, it should be noted that the binding source object is not restricted to being a custom CLR object. WPF data binding supports data in the form of CLR objects and XML. To provide some examples, your binding source may be a <xref:System.Windows.UIElement>, any list object, a CLR object that is associated with ADO.NET data or Web Services, or an XmlNode that contains your XML data. For more information, see [Binding Sources Overview](../../framework/wpf/data/binding-sources-overview.md).

As you read through other SDK articles, it is important to remember that when you are establishing a binding, you are binding a binding target *to* a binding source. For example, if you are displaying some underlying XML data in a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox> using data binding, you are binding your `ListBox` to the XML data.

To establish a binding, you use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> object. The rest of this article discusses many of the concepts associated with and some of the properties and usage of the `Binding` object.

### Direction of the data flow

> As mentioned previously and as indicated by the arrow in the figure above, the data flow of a binding can go from the binding target to the binding source (for example, the source value changes when a user edits the value of a `TextBox`) and/or from the binding source to the binding target (for example, your `TextBox` content gets updated with changes in the binding source) if the binding source provides the proper notifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As indicated by the arrow in the previous figure, the data flow of a binding can go from the binding target to the binding source (for example, the source value changes when a user edits the value of a `TextBox`) and/or from the binding source to the binding target (for example, your `TextBox` content is updated with changes in the binding source) if the binding source provides the proper notifications.
```

> You may want your application to enable users to change the data and propagate it back to the source object. Or you may not want to enable users to update the source data. You can control the flow of data by setting the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Mode%2A> property of your <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> object. The following figure illustrates the different types of data flow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may want your application to enable users to change the data and propagate it back to the source object. Or you may not want to enable users to update the source data. You can control the flow of data by setting the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Mode?displayProperty=nameWithType>. The following figure illustrates the different types of data flow:
```

![Data binding data flow](./media/data-binding-overview/databinding-dataflow.png "DataBinding_DataFlow")

> - <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding causes changes to the source property to automatically update the target property, but changes to the target property are not propagated back to the source property. This type of binding is appropriate if the control being bound is implicitly read-only. For instance, you may bind to a source such as a stock ticker or perhaps your target property has no control interface provided for making changes, such as a data-bound background color of a table. If there is no need to monitor the changes of the target property, using the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding mode avoids the overhead of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> binding mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding causes changes to the source property to automatically update the target property, but changes to the target property are not propagated back to the source property. This type of binding is appropriate if the control being bound is implicitly read-only. For instance, you may bind to a source such as a stock ticker, or perhaps your target property has no control interface provided for making changes, such as a data-bound background color of a table. If there is no need to monitor the changes of the target property, using the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding mode avoids the overhead of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> binding mode.
```

> - <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> binding causes changes to either the source property or the target property to automatically update the other. This type of binding is appropriate for editable forms or other fully interactive UI scenarios. Most properties default to <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding, but some dependency properties (typically properties of user-editable controls such as the `TextBox.Text` property and the `CheckBox.IsChecked`) default to <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> binding. A programmatic way to determine whether a dependency property binds one-way or two-way by default is to get the property metadata with <xref:System.Windows.DependencyProperty.GetMetadata%2A> and then check the Boolean value of the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkPropertyMetadata.BindsTwoWayByDefault%2A> property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> binding causes changes to either the source property or the target property to automatically update the other. This type of binding is appropriate for editable forms or other fully interactive UI scenarios. Most properties default to <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding, but some dependency properties (typically properties of user-editable controls such as the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TextBox.Text?displayProperty=nameWithType> and  <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox.IsChecked?displayProperty=nameWithType>) default to <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> binding. A programmatic way to determine whether a dependency property binds one-way or two-way by default is to get the property metadata with <xref:System.Windows.DependencyProperty.GetMetadata%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> and then check the Boolean value of the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkPropertyMetadata.BindsTwoWayByDefault%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> property.
```

- <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWayToSource> is the reverse of <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding; it updates the source property when the target property changes. One example scenario is if you only need to reevaluate the source value from the UI.

> - Not illustrated in the figure is <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneTime> binding, which causes the source property to initialize the target property, but subsequent changes do not propagate. This mode means that if the data context undergoes a change or the object in the data context changes, then the change is not reflected in the target property. This type of binding is appropriate if you are using data where either a snapshot of the current state is appropriate to use or the data is truly static. This type of binding is also useful if you want to initialize your target property with some value from a source property and the data context is not known in advance. This mode is essentially a simpler form of <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding that provides better performance in cases where the source value does not change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Not illustrated in the figure is <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneTime> binding, which causes the source property to initialize the target property but does not propagate subsequent changes. If the data context changes or the object in the data context changes, the change is *not* reflected in the target property. This type of binding is appropriate if either a snapshot of the current state is appropriate or the data is truly static. This type of binding is also useful if you want to initialize your target property with some value from a source property and the data context is not known in advance. This mode is essentially a simpler form of <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding that provides better performance in cases where the source value does not change.
```

> To detect source changes (applicable to <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> and <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> bindings), the source must implement a suitable property change notification mechanism such as <xref:System.ComponentModel.INotifyPropertyChanged>. See [Implement Property Change Notification](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-implement-property-change-notification.md) for an example of an <xref:System.ComponentModel.INotifyPropertyChanged> implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To detect source changes (applicable to <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> and <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> bindings), the source must implement a suitable property change notification mechanism such as <xref:System.ComponentModel.INotifyPropertyChanged>. See [How to: Implement Property Change Notification](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-implement-property-change-notification.md) for an example of an <xref:System.ComponentModel.INotifyPropertyChanged> implementation.
```

> The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Mode%2A> property page provides more information about binding modes and an example of how to specify the direction of a binding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Mode?displayProperty=nameWithtype> property provides more information about binding modes and an example of how to specify the direction of a binding.
```
It actually doesn't. Possibly it was deleted.

### What triggers source updates

> Bindings that are <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> or <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWayToSource> listen for changes in the target property and propagate them back to the source, known as updating the source. For example, you may edit the text of a TextBox to change the underlying source value. As described in the last section, the direction of the data flow is determined by the value of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Mode%2A> property of the binding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bindings that are <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> or <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWayToSource> listen for changes in the target property and propagate them back to the source, known as updating the source. For example, you may edit the text of a TextBox to change the underlying source value. 
```

> However, does your source value get updated while you are editing the text or after you finish editing the text and point your mouse away from the TextBox? The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger%2A> property of the binding determines what triggers the update of the source. The dots of the right arrows in the following figure illustrate the role of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger%2A> property:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, is your source value updated while you are editing the text or after you finish editing the text and the control loses focus? The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger?displayProperty=nameWithType> property determines what triggers the update of the source. The dots of the right arrows in the following figure illustrate the role of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger?displayProperty=nameWithType> property:
```

![Diagram that shows the role of the UpdateSourceTrigger property.](./media/data-binding-overview/data-binding-updatesource-trigger.png)

> If the `UpdateSourceTrigger` value is <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.PropertyChanged>, then the value pointed to by the right arrow of <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> or the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWayToSource> bindings gets updated as soon as the target property changes. However, if the `UpdateSourceTrigger` value is <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.LostFocus>, then that value only gets updated with the new value when the target property loses focus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `UpdateSourceTrigger` value is <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.PropertyChanged>, then the value pointed to by the right arrow of <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.TwoWay> or the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWayToSource> bindings is updated as soon as the target property changes. However, if the `UpdateSourceTrigger` value is <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.LostFocus>, then that value only is updated with the new value when the target property loses focus.
```

> Similar to the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Mode%2A> property, different dependency properties have different default <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger%2A> values. The default value for most dependency properties is <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.PropertyChanged>, while the `TextBox.Text` property has a default value of <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.LostFocus>. `PropertyChanged` means the source updates usually happen whenever the target property changes. Instant changes are fine for CheckBoxes and other simple controls. However, for text fields, updating after every keystroke can diminish performance and it denies the user the usual opportunity to backspace and fix typing errors before committing to the new value. Which is why the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TextBox.Text%2A> property has a default value of `LostFocus` instead of <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.PropertyChanged>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Mode%2A> property, different dependency properties have different default <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger%2A> values. The default value for most dependency properties is <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.PropertyChanged>, while the `TextBox.Text` property has a default value of <xref:System.Windows.Data.UpdateSourceTrigger.LostFocus>. `PropertyChanged` means the source updates usually happen whenever the target property changes. Instant changes are fine for CheckBoxes and other simple controls. However, for text fields, updating after every keystroke can diminish performance and denies the user the usual opportunity to backspace and fix typing errors before committing to the new value. 
```

See the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger%2A> property page for information about how to find the default value of a dependency property.

The following table provides an example scenario for each <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.UpdateSourceTrigger%2A> value using the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TextBox> as an example:

| UpdateSourceTrigger value | When the Source Value Gets Updated | Example Scenario for TextBox |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| `LostFocus` (default for <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TextBox.Text%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>) | When the TextBox control loses focus. | A TextBox that is associated with validation logic (see [Data Validation](#data-validation) below). |
| `PropertyChanged` | As you type into the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TextBox>. | TextBox controls in a chat room window. |
| `Explicit` | When the application calls <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingExpression.UpdateSource%2A>. | TextBox controls in an editable form (updates the source values only when the user clicks the submit button). |

> For an example, see [Control When the TextBox Text Updates the Source](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-control-when-the-textbox-text-updates-the-source.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an example, see [How to: Control When the TextBox Text Updates the Source](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-control-when-the-textbox-text-updates-the-source.md).
```

## Creating a binding

> To restate some of the concepts discussed in the previous sections, you establish a binding using the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> object, and each binding usually has four components: binding target, target property, binding source, and a path to the source value to use. This section discusses how to set up a binding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To restate some of the concepts discussed in the previous sections, you establish a binding using the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> object, and each binding usually has four components: a binding target, a target property, a binding source, and a path to the source value to use. This section discusses how to set up a binding.
```

> Consider the following example, in which the binding source object is a class named *MyData* that is defined in the *SDKSample* namespace. For demonstration purposes, *MyData* class has a string property named *ColorName*, of which the value is set to "Red". Thus, this example generates a button with a red background.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider the following example, in which the binding source object is a class named *MyData* that is defined in the *SDKSample* namespace. For demonstration purposes, *MyData* has a string property named *ColorName* whose value is set to "Red". Thus, this example generates a button with a red background.
```

[!code-xaml[BindNonTextProperty](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/AutoConvertPropertyToColor.xaml#BindAutoConvertColor)]

For more information on the binding declaration syntax and examples of how to set up a binding in code, see [Binding Declarations Overview](../../framework/wpf/data/binding-declarations-overview.md).

If we apply this example to our basic diagram, the resulting figure looks like the following. This figure describes a <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding because the Background property supports <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingMode.OneWay> binding by default.

![Diagram that shows the data binding Background property.](./media/data-binding-overview/data-binding-button-background-example.png)

> You may wonder why this binding works even though the *ColorName* property is of type string while the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Background%2A> property is of type <xref:System.Windows.Media.Brush>. This binding uses default type conversion and is discussed in the [Data Conversion](#data-conversion) section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may wonder why this binding works even though the *ColorName* property is of type string while the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Background%2A> property is of type <xref:System.Windows.Media.Brush>. This binding uses default type conversion, which is discussed in the [Data Conversion](#data-conversion) section.
```

### Specifying the binding source

> Notice that in the previous example, the binding source is specified by setting the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> property on the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.DockPanel> element. The <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Button> then inherits the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> value from the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.DockPanel>, which is its parent element. To reiterate, the binding source object is one of the four necessary components of a binding. Therefore, without the binding source object being specified, the binding would do nothing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that in the previous example, the binding source is specified by setting the [DockPanel.DataContext](xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext) property. The <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Button> then inherits the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> value from the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.DockPanel>, which is its parent element. To reiterate, the binding source object is one of the four necessary components of a binding. Therefore, without the binding source object being specified, the binding would do nothing.
```

There are several ways to specify the binding source object. Using the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> property on a parent element is useful when you are binding multiple properties to the same source. However, sometimes it may be more appropriate to specify the binding source on individual binding declarations. For the previous example, instead of using the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> property, you can specify the binding source by setting the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Source%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> property directly on the binding declaration of the button, as in the following example:

[!code-xaml[BindNonTextPropertyCompactBinding](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/AutoConvertPropertyToColor.xaml#BindAutoConvertColorCompactBinding)]

> Other than setting the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> property on an element directly, inheriting the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> value from an ancestor (such as the button in the first example), and explicitly specifying the binding source by setting the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Source%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> property on the binding (such as the button the last example), you can also use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.ElementName%2A> property or the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.RelativeSource%2A> property to specify the binding source. The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.ElementName%2A> property is useful when you are binding to other elements in your application, such as when you are using a slider to adjust the width of a button. The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.RelativeSource%2A> property is useful when the binding is specified in a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> or a <xref:System.Windows.Style>. For more information, see [Specify the Binding Source](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-specify-the-binding-source.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other than setting the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> property on an element directly, inheriting the <xref:System.Windows.FrameworkElement.DataContext%2A> value from an ancestor (such as the button in the first example), and explicitly specifying the binding source by setting the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Source%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> property on the binding (such as the button the last example), you can also use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.ElementName?displayProperty=nameWithType> property or the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.RelativeSource?displayProperty=nameWithType> property to specify the binding source. The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.ElementName%2A> property is useful when you are binding to other elements in your application, such as when you are using a slider to adjust the width of a button. The <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.RelativeSource%2A> property is useful when the binding is specified in a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> or a <xref:System.Windows.Style>. For more information, see [How to: Specify the Binding Source](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-specify-the-binding-source.md).
```

### Specifying the path to the value

> If your binding source is an object, you use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> property to specify the value to use for your binding. If you are binding to XML data, you use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.XPath%2A> property to specify the value. In some cases, it may be applicable to use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> property even when your data is XML. For example, if you want to access the Name property of a returned XmlNode (as a result of an XPath query), you should use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> property in addition to the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.XPath%2A> property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your binding source is an object, you use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path?displayProperty=nameWithType> property to specify the value to use for your binding. If you are binding to XML data, you use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.XPath?displayProperty=nameWithType> property to specify the value. In some cases, it may be applicable to use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> property even when your data is XML. For example, if you want to access the Name property of a returned XmlNode (as a result of an XPath query), you should use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> property in addition to the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.XPath%2A> property.
```

> For syntax information and examples, see the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> and <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.XPath%2A> property pages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, see the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> and <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.XPath%2A> properties.
```

Although we have emphasized that the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A> to the value to use is one of the four necessary components of a binding, in the scenarios that you want to bind to an entire object, the value to use would be the same as the binding source object. In those cases, it is applicable to not specify a <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.Path%2A>. Consider the following example:

[!code-xaml[EmptyBinding](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/EmptyBinding.xaml#EmptyBinding)]

The above example uses the empty binding syntax: {Binding}. In this case, the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox> inherits the DataContext from a parent DockPanel element (not shown in this example). When the path is not specified, the default is to bind to the entire object. In other words, in this example, the path has been left out because we are binding the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ItemsControl.ItemsSource%2A> property to the entire object. (See the [Binding to Collections](#binding-to-collections) section for an in-depth discussion.)

> Other than binding to a collection, this scenario is also useful when you want to bind to an entire object instead of just a single property of an object. For example, if your source object is of type string and you simply want to bind to the string itself. Another common scenario is when you want to bind an element to an object with several properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other than binding to a collection, this scenario is also useful when you want to bind to an entire object instead of just a single property of an object. For example, if your source object is of type <xref:System.String>, you may simply want to bind to the string itself. Another common scenario is when you want to bind an element to an object with several properties.
```

> You may need to apply custom logic so that the data is meaningful to your bound target property. The custom logic may be in the form of a custom converter (if default type conversion does not exist). See [Data Conversion](#data-conversion) for information about converters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may need to apply custom logic so that the data is meaningful to your bound target property. The custom logic may be in the form of a custom converter if default type conversion does not exist. See [Data Conversion](#data-conversion) for information about converters.
```

### Binding and BindingExpression

> Before getting into other features and usages of data binding, it would be useful to introduce the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingExpression> class. As you have seen in previous sections, the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> class is the high-level class for the declaration of a binding; the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> class provides many properties that allow you to specify the characteristics of a binding. A related class, <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingExpression>, is the underlying object that maintains the connection between the source and the target. A binding contains all the information that can be shared across several binding expressions. A <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingExpression> is an instance expression that cannot be shared and contains all the instance information of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before getting into other features and usages of data binding, it is useful to introduce the <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingExpression> class. As you have seen in previous sections, the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> class is the high-level class for the declaration of a binding; it provides many properties that allow you to specify the characteristics of a binding. A related class, <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingExpression>, is the underlying object that maintains the connection between the source and the target. A binding contains all the information that can be shared across several binding expressions. A <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingExpression> is an instance expression that cannot be shared and contains all the instance information of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding>.
```

[!code-csharp[CodeOnlyBinding](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/ColorBrushConverter.cs#ColorBrushConverter)]
[!code-vb[CodeOnlyBinding](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/vb/ColorBrushConverter.vb#ColorBrushConverter)]

The <xref:System.Windows.Data.IValueConverter> reference page provides more information.

Now the custom converter is used instead of default conversion, and our diagram looks like this:

![Diagram that shows the data binding custom converter.](./media/data-binding-overview/data-binding-converter-color-example.png)

To reiterate, default conversions may be available because of type converters that are present in the type being bound to. This behavior will depend on which type converters are available in the target. If in doubt, create your own converter.

> Following are some typical scenarios where it makes sense to implement a data converter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following are some typical scenarios where it makes sense to implement a data converter:
```

> - Your data should be displayed differently, depending on culture. For instance, you might want to implement a currency converter or a calendar date/time converter based on the values or standards used in a particular culture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Your data should be displayed differently, depending on culture. For instance, you might want to implement a currency converter or a calendar date/time converter based on the conventions used in a particular culture.
```

- The data being used is not necessarily intended to change the text value of a property, but is instead intended to change some other value, such as the source for an image, or the color or style of the display text. Converters can be used in this instance by converting the binding of a property that might not seem to be appropriate, such as binding a text field to the Background property of a table cell.

> - More than one control or to multiple properties of controls are bound to the same data. In this case, the primary binding might just display the text, whereas other bindings handle specific display issues but still use the same binding as source information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- More than one control or multiple properties of controls are bound to the same data. In this case, the primary binding might just display the text, whereas other bindings handle specific display issues but still use the same binding as source information.
```

> - So far we have not yet discussed <xref:System.Windows.Data.MultiBinding>, where a target property has a collection of bindings. For <xref:System.Windows.Data.MultiBinding>, you use a custom <xref:System.Windows.Data.IMultiValueConverter> to produce a final value from the values of the bindings. For example, color may be computed from red, blue, and green values, which can be values from the same or different binding source objects. See the <xref:System.Windows.Data.MultiBinding> class page for examples and information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A target property has a collection of bindings, which is termed <xref:System.Windows.Data.MultiBinding>. For <xref:System.Windows.Data.MultiBinding>, you use a custom <xref:System.Windows.Data.IMultiValueConverter> to produce a final value from the values of the bindings. For example, color may be computed from red, blue, and green values, which can be values from the same or different binding source objects. See  <xref:System.Windows.Data.MultiBinding> for examples and information.
```

## Binding to collections

> A binding source object can be treated either as a single object of which the properties contain data or as a data collection of polymorphic objects that are often grouped together (such as the result of a query to a database). So far we've only discussed binding to single objects, however, binding to a data collection is a common scenario. For example, a common scenario is to use an <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ItemsControl> such as a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox>, <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListView>, or <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TreeView> to display a data collection, such as in the application shown in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A binding source object can be treated either as a single object whose properties contain data or as a data collection of polymorphic objects that are often grouped together (such as the result of a query to a database). So far we've only discussed binding to single objects. However, binding to a data collection is a common scenario. For example, a common scenario is to use an <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ItemsControl> such as a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox>, <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListView>, or <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TreeView> to display a data collection, such as in the application shown in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section.
```

### How to implement collections

You can enumerate over any collection that implements the <xref:System.Collections.IEnumerable> interface. However, to set up dynamic bindings so that insertions or deletions in the collection update the UI automatically, the collection must implement the <xref:System.Collections.Specialized.INotifyCollectionChanged> interface. This interface exposes an event that should be raised whenever the underlying collection changes.

WPF provides the <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ObservableCollection%601> class, which is a built-in implementation of a data collection that exposes the <xref:System.Collections.Specialized.INotifyCollectionChanged> interface. To fully support transferring data values from source objects to targets, each object in your collection that supports bindable properties must also implement the <xref:System.ComponentModel.INotifyPropertyChanged> interface. For more information, see [Binding Sources Overview](../../framework/wpf/data/binding-sources-overview.md).

> Before implementing your own collection, consider using <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ObservableCollection%601> or one of the existing collection classes, such as <xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601>, <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.Collection%601>, and <xref:System.ComponentModel.BindingList%601>, among many others. If you have an advanced scenario and want to implement your own collection, consider using <xref:System.Collections.IList>, which provides a non-generic collection of objects that can be individually accessed by index and thus the best performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before implementing your own collection, consider using <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ObservableCollection%601> or one of the existing collection classes, such as <xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601>, <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.Collection%601>, and <xref:System.ComponentModel.BindingList%601>, among many others. If you have an advanced scenario and want to implement your own collection, consider using <xref:System.Collections.IList>, which provides a non-generic collection of objects that can be individually accessed by index and thus the best performance.
```
I suspect the IList guidance is dated. I think that the sentence can be removed.

### Collection views

Once your <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ItemsControl> is bound to a data collection, you may want to sort, filter, or group the data. To do that, you use collection views, which are classes that implement the <xref:System.ComponentModel.ICollectionView> interface.

> #### What Are collection views

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### What Are collection views?
```

| <xref:System.Collections.IEnumerable>     | An internal type based on <xref:System.Windows.Data.CollectionView> | Cannot group items. |
| <xref:System.Collections.IList>           | <xref:System.Windows.Data.ListCollectionView> | Fastest. |
| <xref:System.ComponentModel.IBindingList> | <xref:System.Windows.Data.BindingListCollectionView> | |

#### Using a default view

Specifying a collection view as a binding source is one way to create and use a collection view. WPF also creates a default collection view for every collection used as a binding source. If you bind directly to a collection, WPF binds to its default view. This default view is shared by all bindings to the same collection, so a change made to a default view by one bound control or code (such as sorting or a change to the current item pointer, discussed later) is reflected in all other bindings to the same collection.

To get the default view, you use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.CollectionViewSource.GetDefaultView%2A> method. For an example, see [Get the Default View of a Data Collection](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-get-the-default-view-of-a-data-collection.md).

#### Collection views with ADO.NET DataTables

> To improve performance, collection views for ADO.NET <xref:System.Data.DataTable> or <xref:System.Data.DataView> objects delegate sorting and filtering to the <xref:System.Data.DataView>. Which causes sorting and filtering to be shared across all collection views of the data source. To enable each collection view to sort and filter independently, initialize each collection view with its own <xref:System.Data.DataView> object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To improve performance, collection views for ADO.NET <xref:System.Data.DataTable> or <xref:System.Data.DataView> objects delegate sorting and filtering to the <xref:System.Data.DataView>, which causes sorting and filtering to be shared across all collection views of the data source. To enable each collection view to sort and filter independently, initialize each collection view with its own <xref:System.Data.DataView> object.
```

#### Sorting

> As mentioned before, views can apply a sort order to a collection. As it exists in the underlying collection, your data may or may not have a relevant, inherent order. The view over the collection allows you to impose an order, or change the default order, based on comparison criteria that you supply. Because it is a client-based view of the data, a common scenario is that the user might want to sort columns of tabular data per the value that the column corresponds to. Using views, this user-driven sort can be applied, again without making any changes to the underlying collection or even having to requery for the collection content. For an example, see [Sort a GridView Column When a Header Is Clicked](../../framework/wpf/controls/how-to-sort-a-gridview-column-when-a-header-is-clicked.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned before, views can apply a sort order to a collection. As it exists in the underlying collection, your data may or may not have a relevant, inherent order. The view over the collection allows you to impose an order, or change the default order, based on comparison criteria that you supply. Because it is a client-based view of the data, a common scenario is that the user might want to sort columns of tabular data based on the value that the column corresponds to. Using views, this user-driven sort can be applied, again without making any changes to the underlying collection or even having to requery for the collection content. For an example, see [Sort a GridView Column When a Header Is Clicked](../../framework/wpf/controls/how-to-sort-a-gridview-column-when-a-header-is-clicked.md).
```

The following example shows the sorting logic of the "Sort by category and date" <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox> of the application UI in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section:

[!code-csharp[AddSortChecked](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/CollectionView.xaml.cs#AddSortChecked)]
[!code-vb[AddSortChecked](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/vb/CollectionView.xaml.vb#AddSortChecked)]

#### Filtering

> Views can also apply a filter to a collection. Meaning, that although an item might exist in the collection, this particular view is intended to show only a certain subset of the full collection. You might filter on a condition in the data. For instance, as is done by the application in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section, the "Show only bargains" <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox> contains logic to filter out items that cost $25 or more. The following code is executed to set *ShowOnlyBargainsFilter* as the <xref:System.Windows.Data.CollectionViewSource.Filter> event handler when that <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox> is selected:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Views can also apply a filter to a collection, so that the view shows only a certain subset of the full collection. You might filter on a condition in the data. For instance, as is done by the application in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section, the "Show only bargains" <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox> contains logic to filter out items that cost $25 or more. The following code is executed to set *ShowOnlyBargainsFilter* as the <xref:System.Windows.Data.CollectionViewSource.Filter> event handler when that <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox> is selected:
```

[!code-csharp[ListingViewFilter](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/CollectionView.xaml.cs#ListingViewFilter)]
[!code-vb[ListingViewFilter](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/vb/CollectionView.xaml.vb#ListingViewFilter)]

The *ShowOnlyBargainsFilter* event handler has the following implementation:

[!code-csharp[FilterEvent](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/CollectionView.xaml.cs#FilterEvent)]
[!code-vb[FilterEvent](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/vb/CollectionView.xaml.vb#FilterEvent)]

If you are using one of the <xref:System.Windows.Data.CollectionView> classes directly instead of <xref:System.Windows.Data.CollectionViewSource>, you would use the <xref:System.Windows.Data.CollectionView.Filter%2A> property to specify a callback. For an example, see [Filter Data in a View](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-filter-data-in-a-view.md).

#### Grouping

> Except for the internal class that views an <xref:System.Collections.IEnumerable> collection, all collection views support the functionality of grouping, which allows the user to partition the collection in the collection view into logical groups. The groups can be explicit, where the user supplies a list of groups, or implicit, where the groups are generated dynamically depending on the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Except for the internal class that views an <xref:System.Collections.IEnumerable> collection, all collection views support *grouping*, which allows the user to partition the collection in the collection view into logical groups. The groups can be explicit, where the user supplies a list of groups, or implicit, where the groups are generated dynamically depending on the data.
```

For other examples, see [Bind to a Collection and Display Information Based on Selection](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-bind-to-a-collection-and-display-information-based-on-selection.md) and [Use the Master-Detail Pattern with Hierarchical Data](../../framework/wpf/data/how-to-use-the-master-detail-pattern-with-hierarchical-data.md).

You may have noticed that the above example uses a template. In fact, the data would not be displayed the way we wish without the use of templates (the one explicitly used by the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl> and the one implicitly used by the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox>). We now turn to data templating in the next section.

## Data templating

> Without the use of data templates, our application UI in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section would look like the following image:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without the use of data templates, our application UI in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section would look like the following:
```

![Data Binding Demo without Data Templates](./media/data-binding-overview/demo-no-template.png)

> As shown in the example in the previous section, both the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox> control and the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl> are bound to the entire collection object (or more specifically, the view over the collection object) of *AuctionItem*s. Without specific instructions of how to display the data collection, the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox> is displaying a string representation of each object in the underlying collection and the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl> is displaying a string representation of the object it is bound to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As shown in the example in the previous section, both the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox> control and the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl> are bound to the entire collection object (or more specifically, the view over the collection object) of *AuctionItem*s. Without specific instructions of how to display the data collection, the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ListBox> displays the string representation of each object in the underlying collection, and the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl> displays the string representation of the object it is bound to.
```

[!code-xaml[AuctionItemDataTemplate](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/CollectionView.xaml#AuctionItemDataTemplate)]

With the use of those two DataTemplates, the resulting UI is the one shown in the [What Is Data Binding](#what-is-data-binding) section. As you can see from that screenshot, in addition to letting you place data in your controls, DataTemplates allow you to define compelling visuals for your data. For example, <xref:System.Windows.DataTrigger>s are used in the above <xref:System.Windows.DataTemplate> so that *AuctionItem*s with *SpecialFeatures* value of *HighLight* would be displayed with an orange border and a star.

For more information about data templates, see the [Data Templating Overview](../../framework/wpf/data/data-templating-overview.md).

## Data validation

> Most applications that take user input need to have validation logic to ensure that the user has entered the expected information. The validation checks can be based on type, range, format, or other application-specific requirements. This section discusses how data validation works in the WPF.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most applications that take user input need to have validation logic to ensure that the user has entered the expected information. The validation checks can be based on type, range, format, or other application-specific requirements. This section discusses how data validation works in WPF.
```

### Associating validation rules with a binding

The WPF data binding model allows you to associate <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.ValidationRules%2A> with your <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding> object. For example, the following example binds a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.TextBox> to a property named `StartPrice` and adds a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ExceptionValidationRule> object to the <xref:System.Windows.Data.Binding.ValidationRules%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> property.

[!code-xaml[TextboxStartPrice](../../../samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/data-binding-overview/csharp/DataValidation.xaml#TextboxStartPrice)]

> A <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ValidationRule> object checks whether the value of a property is valid. WPF has the following two types of built-in <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ValidationRule> objects:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ValidationRule> object checks whether the value of a property is valid. WPF has two types of built-in <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ValidationRule> objects:
```
